---
published: true
layout: post
title: An Education
---

Eight weeks ago I enrolled in [Hack Reactor](http://www.hackreactor.com/ "Hack Reactor")'s first Remote Beta Cohort. In this post I'll describe what my experience has been like so far, what I think they do well and where I'd like to see improvement.

For about a year I've been attempting to learn software engineering on my own with the objective of landing work that will give me the flexibility to live where I choose. I have tried most of the typical free or almost free options: treehouse, code academy and code school.

These services are great for getting introduced to coding and offer a wide breadth of material but after completing several tracts spread across them, I wasn't experiencing the progress I desired.

I eventually enrolled in the full stack course at [Bloc.io](https://www.bloc.io/ "Bloc"), which was the only course they offered at the time. When you sign up with Bloc, you get assigned a mentor whose job is to guide you through the course. You're expected to meet with your mentor at least three times a week. This model makes Bloc much more expensive, roughly $5000 for the course, than the services I mentioned above but it also creates accountability.

First, there's the monetary factor: Spending $5000 on anything is more likely to get your attention than something you get for almost free. Perhaps more importantly, having a mentor, an actual human, who is monitoring your progress is a strong motivator. In addition to being a great learning resource, somebody you can diectly pose questions to, this person's job is to check-in with you on a regular basis and make sure you stay on track.

When I finished Bloc I had certainly learned more than I would have on my own, but I didn't feel prepared to start looking for work. Bloc doesn't offer any formal job placement assistance and my github profile was pretty sparse. I didn't have the confidence, or ultimately qualifications, to apply for the kinds of jobs I wanted and put my job search on hold.

This spring when I received the announcement regarding Hack Reactor's [remote beta program](http://www.hackreactor.com/remote-beta/ "Remote Beta"), I was intrigued but cautious. I had already spent a large amount of money with no job to show for it and Hack Reactor's program cost more than three times as much.

I decided to apply to Hack Reactor deferring my concerns until I found out if I had been accepted. This is something that sets Hack Reactor apart from all of the other immersive coding schools that I know of: they screen their applicants. This immediately raises the credibility of Hack Reactor over other options. They want to graduate the best software engineers possible and it all starts by being selective with who they admit. Recent acceptance rates are around 3%.

Hack Reactor teaches software engineering through JavaScript and the application process reflected as much. In order to indicate interst in the program, Hack Reactor presents a coding challenge where you needed to write a JavaScript function that submits your contact details to the school. This short exercise sets the tone for everything that follows.

Once finished with the first challenge, a new much bigger challenge was unlocked. The second phase was a chat application coding project. The basic requirements were to connect to a chat-bot through the [parse.com api](https://parse.com/docs/rest "Parse Api") using Ajax. Successful completion of this step required posting messages and retrieving them automatically. Hack Reactor offered no instruction with this assignment although there were clues sprinkled throughout the project. It was only after I submitted a working program that I was allowed to schedule a tech interview.

My tech interview took place over Skype. After a few minutes of introduction I was sequentially given three coding exercises. Each one required me to implement array utility methods without using any of the built in array methods. I won't tell you exactly which methods I had to write, they'll likely be different for you, but if you're thinking about applying, make sure you study up on functions.

I spent more time preparing for my Hack Reactor interview than I did for admission to both undergraduate and graduate school. Fortunately, it paid off and I was accepted. I quickly found out that being accepted doesn't guarantee a spot in the program. Once I confirmed my intent to enroll, I was given access to the precourse material.

The pre-course material is mandatory and you will be required to submit it for review. Hack Reactor expects that it will take between 50 and 100 hours to complete the pre-course material. If you don't complete it on time, you don't get to start the program.

A portion of the pre-course assignments includes rewriting about twenty five methods from a well know javascript library, solving two recursion problems and creating a twitter clone. This is where I also noticed that Hack Reactor's curriculum goes well beyond coding. Included in the pre-course material were articles on etiquette, [impostor syndrome](https://medium.com/@aliciatweet/overcoming-impostor-syndrome-bdae04e46ec5 "impostor syndrome") and why [programming sucks](http://stilldrinking.org/programming-sucks "programming sucks").

The application process and subsequent pre-course material contribute to Hack Reactor's overall goal of graduating great software engineers by establishing a baseline competence. Students at Hack Reactor come from many different backgrounds and with a wide variety of professional experience. Other programs will spend a substantial portion of their curriculum going over fundamental programming concepts: defining variables or the basic data types. This frequently is material that most people can learn on their own. Hack Reactor wants to make sure that every day in class is a challenging learning opportunity. Taking the time to complete the prework primes the student for the Hack Reactor experience and ensures that the program can make an impact from day one.

Hack Reactor breaks down the 13 week program in to two six week classes, juniors and seniors, bridged by a curiously named "solo" week.

The remote program has been guided by [Shawn Drost](http://www.hackreactor.com/team "Shawn Drost"), one of Hack Reactor's co founders. He is the steward of the remote program and is deeply invested in its success. Shawn is our point contact for the program and is available throughout the entire day via hangout, chat or email. We are also accompanied by a Shepard, [Aaron Ward](http://aaronward.io/ "Aaron Ward"), a recent Hack Reactor graduate. It's great to have the perspective of a recent student.

Both Shawn and Aaron are readily available for private one on one interaction to discuss anything you want. This could be anything from a pair coding session, a review session or if you just want to grok out on some cool tech.

The first six weeks are the core curriculum which focuses on software engineering fundamentals. The basic format consists of two day sprints: A topic is introduced and you spend the next two days completing a directed project designed to reinforce the main concepts of that topic. Typically the project is introduced and you then break into pairs to hack away at the project. There is generally a second more in depth lecture followed by more programming into the next day and then a solution lecture. The sprint wraps up with a final few hours which is intended for code clean-up.

Since this is a remote program, all of the live interaction happens in google hangouts. Should you choose to participate in the the remote program, invest in a good set of comfortable headphones. You will be wearing them for extended hours throughout the day. Headphones are necessary, because otherwise your microphone can pick-up the output from your speakers creating an echo loop which is noticeable by everybody but you. It is very annoying, please don't be that guy or gal.

Going in, I didn't know how big the remote class was and wasn't sure how the lectures would work with the on site teachers and students. I've seen lectures streamed live before and kind of assumed that it would be set-up in a similar manner, where remote particiants ask questions through instant messenger. It turns out that Hack Reactor's remote cohort is not at all integrated with the on site students. This was an initial disappointment.

There are roughly seventy on site students and only eleven remote students. Part of the reason I joined Hack Reactor was to tap into the network of students who would be going through the class at the same time as well as the alumni and staff who are on site. We don't have much interaction with on site staff or students, but for now its difficult to gauge how much of a detriment this is to the overall experience.

Generally we watch prerecorded lectures which has advantages and disadvantages. When we first started, the lectures we watched had been recorded in the previous cohort, seven weeks earlier. As the course has progressed the recordings are now more recent, taken from the concurrent on site cohorts, and occasionally we've been able to have live lectures via google hangouts.

After the first few lectures, I realized that Hack Reactor implements an approach to teaching unlike anything I've ever experienced. First and foremost, they have an incredible lecture staff. [Marcus Phillips, Fred Zirdung and Phillip Alexander](http://www.hackreactor.com/team "Terachers") are in my personal top 5 of best teachers I've ever had. They have mastered both the material and perhaps more importantly, the teaching of the material. A major downside here is as a remote student, I don't have access to them while they are teaching. This is a real short coming of the video lecture format for the remote experience. It is however offset somewhat by the ability to pause, rewind and re watch lectures which is a feature that on site students don't have.

A second noticeable attribute of the lectures, which permeates to pretty much all aspects of the program, is the practice of an agile teaching method. I highly reccomend you [read a detailed description of the process](http://bigbeacon.org/2014/02/rapid-iteration-teaching-and-the-evolution-of-education/ "agile teaching").  You can also watch a [great presentation](http://youtu.be/EmmQfgobzhg "youtube") Marcus gave at the 2013 HTML5 Dev conference in which he does a bit of a demonstration. What this basically means is that the teachers are constantly checking to see if the students are following along. Every few minutes they ask for a "thumbs check", or a rating from the students to gauge how well they're understanding the material. Thumbs up means "Yeah I get it and I can explain it back if asked to do so", thumbs down means "I'm not getting it yet" and thumbs middle is somewhere in between.

This polling is almost always followed by the instructor calling on a random student to explain their vote. It doesn't matter how you voted, they're trying to make sure that everybody, no matter their comfort level with the material is engaged and actively trying to learn. Again this particular experience doesn't translate completely to the remote program because of the recorded lecture format. It hasn't been a total loss though; even without the opportunity to participate in the lecture, I have noticed that I'm making an effort to assess my own understanding of the material whenever the lecturer prompts the class on the recording. Although this could be considered just a minor tweak to a typical lecture format it does make lectures much more engaging on the whole. This becomes an important practice as a student because generally Hack Reactor doesn't provided any takeaway lecture material.

Another big differentiator between Hack Reactor and all of the other online schools is the use of paired programming. I was skeptical about pairing going in, I'm used to working alone and couldn't really imagine how working with somebody in the same situation as myself, somebody else who was there to learn too, would be a beneficial experience. After 8 weeks I'm convinced that this is definitely the right way to program.

You know the old adage that goes something like "Go fast alone, but farther together"? That's what it is like to pair program. It basically works like this: Pairs jump into a google hangout together. We both open a sublime text locally and share session through a [Floobits](https://floobits.com/ "Floobits") (totally awesome!) workspace. This allows us to both type and see what the other person is tying simultaneously. One person is meant to act as the navigator and the other the driver. It's the navigator's job to clearly articulate what they want the driver to type. The driver is only supposed to type code conveyed by the navigator. This process may sound cumbersome but it quickly becomes fluid.

The objective with pairing is to practice communicating with others in a technical setting. This has several side benefits including understanding different ways to approach a problem, learning how to explain your ideas and teach them to others and a communal sense of accomplishment. All of these factors combine to provide a synergistic effect that goes much farther than any other online coding school I've experienced.

Despite how well pair programing at Hack Reactor works, invariably there are times where we get stuck. To deal with this Hack Reactor has developed an almost live help desk. When you get stuck, you push a help button built into their internal application, give a brief description of your problem and a link to your hangout. A help request is answered by a "Hacker in Residence". This is somebody who has completed the program and been hired by the school to work part time.

The Help Desk is generally very responsive and usually arrives in under five minutes. There have been a few cases where it has taken longer and once or twice we were left hanging but on the whole the process works very well. Help is available all hours that class is in session: 9AM - 8PM PST. They also try to stagger their lunch breaks so that they have full coverage between those hours.

Help is also provided in the Hack Reactor way. This means that you will not get an answer to your question wrapped up in a box with a bow on top. The first thing they are going to want to know is what you have done to get yourself unstuck. If you haven't Googled your issue, that's generally the first thing they'll tell you to try. After you've demonstrated a genuine effort to resolve the issue yourself, the help desk will basically ask you a series of leading questions in an effort to communicate how they might solve the problem. Most of the time with just a little bit of more work, you get unstuck and can proceed on your way. Occasionally we've stumped the help desk and that's to be expected. It is unrealistic to expect them to know all of the answers to every possible programming question that may come out of any one of the roughly 20 sprints.

Autonomy and problem solving skills are two of the biggest areas where Hack Reactor aspires to develop competence with their students. A basic premise of their curriculum is that a day in the life of a Software Engineer is filled with uncertainty. How well you cope with that uncertainty will greatly influence how well you do professionally. This is a core tenet of the program. Given the rapid evolution of software as a whole, there is no such thing as a stationary target. What ever you build today will be obsolete in 6 months to a year; or, perhaps you'll be asked to work on a legacy project with no tests, little documentation and nobody around who knows how it works. It is essential that you're comfortable with not knowing something. The key trait that they want you to leave with is the confidence that you can figure it out.

This is a fantastic notion and it is injected into every aspect of instruction. In the first six weeks we were thrown into advanced topics like Data Modeling, Classes, Data Structures, Inheritance Patterns, Algorithms, MVC, Servers, Databases, Authentication and Deployment. Some were more challenging than others, some seemed impossible, but I made it though all of them and definitely have the sense that I could handle most engineering challenges thrown my way.

Hack Reactor respects the commitment that people make to attend the school and consequently they want to ensure at any given moment that you have clear direction on what you should be working on and that you won't run out of things to do. Every sprint has basic requirements that must be completed. If you finish those, there is usually a bunch of extra credit that explore the topic farther and if you're a total boss there is nightmare mode which takes you really deep. I was content to get though the basic requirements for most of the sprints. Occasionally I did get to do a little bit of extra credit, but I never got a glimpse nightmare mode.

All sprints are accompanied by a solution lecture about three quarters of the way through the sprint. Sometimes the solution lecture is a complete soup to nuts explanation of the sprint, but more frequently is is a detailed explanation of a couple core components.

I found the solutions to be helpful on the whole. The instructors almost always present a canonical solution which is substantially different than the approach I took and there is value in getting a walk through from a professional. The nature of the schedule however affords little time to go back and refactor my own work to reflect the best practices laid out in the solution lecture.

Hack Reactor also applies agile practices to the curriculum. Every sprint is concluded with a post sprint reflection. We all join a hangout and spend 15 minutes brainstorming ideas about what we may have liked or disliked about a particular sprint. The ideas are then voted on and then the few with the most interesting or unexpected votes are discussed. Throughout the course, changes to the curriculum have been rolled out based on our specific feedback. This is really cool. They don't always hit their mark, and when they don't, they disappear just a fast as they came, but the willingness to adjust course midway is another great aspect of the program.

The schedule at hack Reactor is intense and over the course of several weeks it can become grueling. The daily shcedule runs for 11 hours, 9am - 8pm PST, 6 days a week. There is an hour break for lunch and every other day and additional lunch hour is allocated for workout time.

Each day kicks off with a toy problem which is a typical programming challenge you may encounter in a tech interview. They run the spectrum from 
moderate to ridiculous. In the first fifteen minutes, the solution to the previous days problem is presented by a Hacker in Residence, and then you get about 45 minutes to work on the new problem. If you can't get it finished in that amount of time you're expected to work on it to try and finish it before the next day's solution lecture.

Finding additional time to work on a toy problem is tough. In addition to the the standard curriculum, Hack Reactor assigns self guided work. In the form of student presentation and blog posts. Given a class of our size, we're responsible for a five minute presentation about once every two weeks. It isn't a long time to talk and the interval is pretty spaced out, but there is still an internal motivation to adequately prepare and that can take a few hours.

Hack Reactor also wants us to blog about one post a week. Hack Reactor's asserts that blogging is easy and valuable. While I certainly agree that blogging is valuable, it most certainly isn't easy for me. The biggest challenge I experience is coming up with ideas that I can write about in a relatively short amount of time. Hack Reactor will tell you that a crappy post that takes you 15 minutes to write is always better than no post and never as bad as you think. I've yet to completely buy into this premise. I don't yet feel like I can write about anything in 15 minutes and time right now for me is a scarce commodity. Neither blogging or student presentations are required to successfully complete the program, but they are heavily encouraged.

While the day is scheduled for eleven hours, Hack Reactor has said that the students who tend to do best in the program dedicate an additional 3 to 4 hours a day. This means if you're considering the remote program because you think it will have less of an impact on your lifestyle than traveling to San Francisco to participate in an on site cohort, you're mistaken. This is more than a full time commitment and you will be doing yourself a disservice if you commit anything less. I do think that Hack Reactor can be a more explicit about this.

Saturday nights, after the dinner break are reserved for social night. On site this usually means a few hours away from the school, out for food, drinks or perhaps a movie. Remotely this means more time in front of your computer with your headphones which means for me, social night doesn't really translate as well to the remote experience. It is generally optional and given my own circumstances I typically take the opportunity to be with my family.

I have three young children and live on the east coast. The daily Hack Reactor shcedule for me runs from Noon to 11pm EST. I frequently stay a couple of hours past 11 and get to bed around 1am. My kids are up everyday at 6am for school, and since my wife works, I need to be up with them so that everybody can get ready and out of the house on time. As the program has progressed, this schedule has had a cumulative effect and between extended sleep deprivation and general fatigue, at times has become quite stressful.

Missing a day or two of class would be a big issue. There is a huge amount of material condensed into a short amount of time. The nature of the schedule means review opportunities are few and far between which would make it very difficult to recover from a missed day or two. Because of this, I've had to miss my wife's birthday, our 10 year wedding anniversary and her high school reunion. A simple phrase coined by one Hack Reactor's co-founders sums it up nicely: "That's not my life right now". This program is not for the faint of heart. It is easily the most rigorous academic experience of my life.

The Junior class winds down with the beginning of the project phase. Currently we are about a week into our thesis projects and for me on the whole, the project phase has had its ups and downs.

Initially it was a fun change from the structured sprints. We all got to work on our own for a two day sprint on a project of our choosing, very much in the spirit of a hackathon. Just get as far as you can on anything. After the sprint, we all presented our projects to the group and it was pretty cool seeing what everybody made.

From there, we broke into pairs of our choosing and picked one of the presented projects to iterate on. This was still kind of fun and again it was neat to see how people iterated on their classmates' work.

There is a week in between the Junior and Senior sessions referred to as "Solo Week". Leading into solo week, we were assigned a group and tasked with completing another project of our own determination. We were given basic requirements for documentation, deployment and testing, but on the whole it was pretty open ended.

Solo Week was billed as a week to regroup, rest and perhaps review some material. There was still a group project that needed to be worked on and I found that aside from taking one extra day off, I kept pretty much the same hours. The biggest difference between Solo Week and the rest of the program is that the staff takes a week off. Based on feedback, in the future I expect Hack Reactor to rebrand Solo Week.

After the first group project, our groups were shuffled and we then had to pick one of the preexisting group projects to work on for the next 4 days. In this case, we were allowed us to pick from on site projects as well which expanded the choices from three to about fifteen.

For me, this project was the hardest to invest in. I was really feeling the effects of the extended schedule by then and wasn't particularly excited by any of the choices. The goal of this iteration was to simulate a professional scenario where you pick-up a project in some state, get familiar with it by reading the source code and documentation and then try to make a meaningful contribution to it with no access to the people who worked on it previously.

I appreciate the value of this type of exercise, but by then was so fatigued that most of the benefit was lost on me. It was a constant challenge to stay motivated when all I wanted to do was sleep. This project thankfully only lasted four days.

Our fifth and final group project is the thesis project. Prior to the thesis project we were all asked to cultivate ideas and pitch them to the group. This is where the size and nature of the remote program probably has been the biggest detriment to the overall experience.

The crux of the problem is twofold: a small group and limited interaction beyond coursework. Fewer people means fewer potential ideas to choose from. This is just a numbers thing, pretty straight forward. The second issue is kind of a passive factor that you don't really notice day in and day out but has implications for the overall experience.

On site, I imagine that by now, people know each other very well. They spend 12+ hours a day working side by side, 6 days a week, sharing meal time, working out together and socializing a bit. There is a bunch of incidental interaction happening there that remote students just don't benefit from. When we take a break, to get up from the computer for a meal or to work out, we're on our own.

The opportunities for small talk and getting to know one another aren't nearly as abundant. That means fewer chances to cultivate relationships and share ideas. This did have an impact on my thesis group project which I think could have been preemptively mitigated a bit.

The thesis is the longest single effort of the entire program. It is intended to be the showcase project from your Hack Reactor portfolio. Our group spent two days trying to develop a project idea we all wanted to pursue, but couldn't really agree on a direction. Everybody brought their own perspectives, interests and objectives and in our case their wasn't enough overlap. We ultimately couldn't agree on a project that we all felt good about, but thankfully Shawn stepped in and essentially assigned us a project.

It isn't a project I would have conceived on my own and the subject matter isn't as exciting as [I imagined when I applied to the program](http://www.wired.com/2013/06/43651/ "Super Computer"). Our project does however present some interesting engineering challenges and it will give us an opportunity to get deep into a [MEAN stack](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MEAN "MEAN"). Since all of the project specs are predefined, we're approaching it as client work which adds an interesting dimension. All in all, I'm good with it and excited for the final result.

In the future I think the remote program would benefit from more scheduled time to develop project ideas as a group. I'd also like to see these sessions guided by experienced Software Engineers so that students can develop a clear sense of project scope.

As students, we come from a wide range of backgrounds and not everybody has experience with this sort of thing. Given the stakes, I think that Hack Reactor should provide a bit more oversight leading up to the thesis phase. I also think they should provide a battery of projects upfront that students can can explore to get a good sense of what to aim for as well as potentially choose from to take a bit of the pressure off.

Along with the thesis project, we concurrently started the job prep phase of the program. It kicked off with a two day resume building sprint and some mock interviews. So far, I imagine that this is pretty analogous to the on site experience with the exception of mock interviews being conducted via google hangout.

I was drawn to Hack Reactor by several factors. One of the biggest was their stellar placement rate. It should be noted that the stats you see on the Hack Reactor site apply to on site graduates only. I'm in the first remote cohort which is still in session, so obviously remote statistics aren't available yet.

It's still unclear how the hiring process will play out for remote students. 
Some of us are traveling to participate in the on site hiring day, but the majority aren't. As a group we're mostly interested in either remote work, or work outside of the Bay Area which seemed to surprise the staff at Hack Reactor a bit. I expected them to have more companies lined up with remote positions available along with a remote counterpart to the on site hiring day, but as of right now I don't really know what's planned.

I do know that Hack Reactor utilizes placement rates and starting salaries as an internal metric and they are totally committed to each of our individual job searches. 

Overall, I'm very happy with my time at Hack Reactor and think it offers opportunities unlike any other remote learning experience. Since its inception about two years ago Hack Reactor has demonstrated that there is a viable alternative to traditional higher education and now they're attempting to replicate that success online. I'm thrilled to be a part of it and it has definitely been an experience I'll cherish.
